# Good Crop, Bad Crop
Remote sensing sugarcane in the Proserpine region

## Background
The sugarcane industry in Queensland contributes over $2 billion to the local economy, placing Australia as the second largest exporter of sugar globally. In Australia, Queensland contributes to 95% of the country's sugarcane growing supply, with northern NSW contributing the remainder ("Sugar" 2020).  Sugarcane is a fast-growing crop with a 9 to 18 month phenological cycle, and in Queensland it is generally harvested between July and November. The leaves of the plant convert the sun's solar energy through a process of photosynthesis and store the energy as carbohydrates in the stalks of the plants. The stalks of the cane are eventually turned into raw sugar once harvested, where they are sent to nearby sugar mills to be crushed (Rahman & Robson 2016, Rahman & Robson 2020, McCollam 2018). 

The yields of sugarcane can vary depending on a range of factors, and farmers have many variables to consider when making decisions to improve the quality of their crop. Some options that farmers may consider are the timing of harvests, the types of sugarcane strain to plant, whether or not to ratoon (harvesting by cutting the plant above the root in order to shorten the phenological cycle, at the trade off of a slightly reduced yield) or the types of fertilisation strategies to employ. Other considerations are the economical, social and environmental impacts that may occur as a result of these decisions, such as polluting local waterways through over fertilisation, the varying labour costs of harvesting at different times of year and whether the region will experience an El Niño or La Niña weather cycle during the growing period, exposing the crops to potentially stressful weather conditions (Kuhnel 1996). Therefore, having some foresight into future conditions can help farmers to make the best decisions using the information available, and reducing risk. 

There are also opportunities to develop practices that offer a reduction in operational costs, and even provide opportunities for revenue growth such as the utilisation of sugarcane byproducts. Fertilisation can be reduced with a positive benefit to crops, where studies have shown that reducing, or at least managing nitrogen application to crops can improve yield, as well as improve the overall quality of the soil (Gracia-Romero et al. 2020). Furthermore, this benefits the local environment by reducing nitrogen runoff polluting local waterways. Additionally, residue from sugarcane was burned where it fell in order to reduce labour costs, however, policies pushed by the Queensland government to shift away from environmentally destructive practices, promote a more sustainable sugarcane industry and a growing biofuel industry has resulted in around 85% of sugarcane to be harvested ‘green’. Sugarcane harvesting creates byproducts such as filter muds, bagasse and molasses, which are used to make produce such as livestock feed, bioethanol, particle boards and rum (Patarua 1986, Rahman et al 2016,  Ashwath & Kabir 2019).

Diseases
In variable weather conditions such as extended wet periods and increase in temperatures, sugarcane is susceptible to diseases that may cause a reduction in quality of the crop and therefore a reduction in yield. Over the past several years, Queensland has experienced droughts and floods, and sugarcane farmers have had to consider growing weather resilient strains of sugarcane or explore other options (Wilson 2016). For example, during a La Niña weather cycle, rainfall increases over Northern and Eastern Australia (figure 1), which can cause sugarcane to get chlorotic streak disease (CSD) , a disease with a significant impact on the yield of sugarcane (Wislon 2016, BOM 2012). 





During warmer weather as a result of a neutral or El Niño weather cycle, the internal temperature of the sugarcane crop can heat up, resulting in carbohydrate and starch to be redirected from the stalk of the plant to the leaves, yellowfin the leaves and reducing the plants photosynthesis capabilities, causing Yellow Canopy Syndrome and a reduced yield (Wilson 2016, BOM 2012). In particularly wet years farmers have been forced to grow other crops such as mung beans in order to cut losses, which has a much lower profit margin (Wilson 2016). Leaf born diseases are best addressed early in the growing season, around 4 to 8 weeks from germination. Higher than usual rainfall during this period helps aphids, the transmitters of a plethora of diseases to spread, where these types of diseases reach their peak impact during the warmest and wettest parts of the growing season, during sugarcanes grand period of growth (Daugrois et al. 2011, “Monitoring establishing crops for leaf diseases” 2021). Therefore, identification of potential health issues of sugarcane will have the highest impacts to the overall yield from quite early in the growing cycle.

Vegetation Indices
There are many ways to measure the health of a plant, such as performing a field survey and collecting data from individual plants in a field. This is impractical on a large scale. In this project we propose using Vegetation Indices derived from satellite images from the Sentinel Satellite 2A mission, as a cost effective, practical way to measure the health of plants across the sugarcane growing regions of Queensland. Through calculations derived from the different visible and invisible light bands captured by the satellites, the health of plants can be inferred through comparing the ratios of reflected and absorbed light at different wavelengths (Rahman et al. 2016, Cruz et al. 2020). Photosynthesis, the main mechanism that sugarcanes use to convert the sun's energy into carbohydrates is determined by a plant's chlorophyll production, which is highly correlated to the amount of red light and infrared light that is reflected by the plant (giving the plant it’s green colour). As discussed earlier, diseases such as Yellow Canopy Disease change the colour of the leaves, resulting in a reduction in the plants capabilities to perform photosynthesis (Gracia-Romero et al., 2020). 

The Leaf Area Index is a measure of leaf material in the canopy of a plant per square meter (figure 2). As it is a ratio, the index is highly variable, where you might see values of less than 1 for desert ecosystems, and values as high as 9 for dense rainforests (Campbell & Norman 1998). LAI is incredibly useful in describing characteristics of vegetation, where it can describe a variety of characteristics important to the growth of sugarcane. One of the most important aspects is light harvesting, where a higher LAI indicates a greater ability to convert the sun's energy into carbohydrates. LAI is also useful in measuring the phenological stage of sugarcanes growth (tillering, grand growth, maturity and senescence), and can indicate the best time for harvesting. LAI cannot be directly measured through satellite data due to the canopy closing over as the crop matures (figure 3), however, other vegetation indices can be used to determine LAI with a high degree of accuracy (figure 4). 







The Normalised Difference of Vegetation Index (NDVI) is one of the most commonly used vegetation indices used in agriculture and allows the identification of tillering and grand growth periods of a crop, as well as the presence of weeds and the ability to predict the yield of a field. This index tends to be saturated and less accurate at later stages of growth, particularly with sugarcane which has a densely leafy canopy that closes over during maturity (figure 3). This will cause an overestimation of the LAI in mature stages of sugarcane growth.

In order to overcome some of the drawbacks of using NDVI at later stages of growth, a Green Normalised Difference of Vegetation Index (GNDVI) can be used. When used on sugarcane crops, it is better at assessing moisture content and nitrogen content in plants, with a higher sensitivity to chlorophyll content. Therefore, peak values of GNDVI indicate the optimal time to harvest sugarcane crops, where studies by Rahman et al. (2016, 2020) have shown there is a high correlation when predicting the actual yield when using the GNDVI earlier in the crops growth cycle (R²=0.87 and RSME=11.33).  

In order to further overcome challenges with using satellite imagery such as anomalous artefacts in the data including buildings, clouds and bodies of water, the Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) can be used. This index measures blue reflectance in order to colour correct for soil signals and effects of aerosol scattering such as clouds. This index can be used with others to indicate LAI and determine crop development (Xue & Su 2017).

Another index to consider is the Normalised Difference of Red Edge Index (NDRE), which is only available for sensors that capture red edge bands. It is a better indicator than NDVI for plant health for mid to late season growth, as it uses green and red edge bands that allow deeper penetration of the leafy part of the plant than the blue or red bands used in other indices (figure 4). It is also thought to be capable of measuring variability in foliar nitrogen levels of crops, which as discussed earlier can be used to determine if there are diseases present in a crop.




Measuring Sugarcane Health
Many studies on sugarcane use vegetation indices NDVI, GNDVI, EVI and NDRE in order to predict the potential yield of the crop, using variables such as presence of disease, fertilisation usage and weather events such as rainfall and temperature to make these analyses and predictions (Rahman & Robson 2016, Rahman & Robson 2020, McCollam 2016, Cruz et al. 2020, Ashwath & Kabir 2019, Susantoro et al. 2018). In McCollam’s (2018) study on the correlation of nitrogen application to sugarcane yield, it was proposed that predicting sugarcane yield using vegetation indices at 100 days after tillering resulted in high correlation to actual yield (figure 5). The study by Rahman and Robson (2020) also utilised a similar methodology and achieved similarly high correlation, utilising a Simple Linear Model (SLM) early in the growth cycle to predict the phenological growth cycle of sugarcane in the Bundaberg region of Queensland. Incorporating a model of the predicted growth at this point in time into the project can provide us with a trajectory of expected growth in order to identify outliers (figure 6) (Rahman & Robson 2020). The model can be used to plot indices derived from the satellite images captured by the Sentinel satellite on a periodical basis across the growing season and inform the product user when there are significant deviations from the expected growth cycle, to identify unhealthy or ‘bad’ crops.



References
Wilson, C. (2016). Mysterious syndrome forces cane growers to diversify. Abc.net.au. Retrieved 1 October 2021, from https://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-25/ycs-forcing-growers-to-diversify/7868666.
Monitoring establishing crops for leaf diseases | Agriculture and Food. Agric.wa.gov.au. Retrieved 12 October 2021, from https://www.agric.wa.gov.au/mycrop/monitoring-establishing-crops-leaf-diseases.
Daugrois, J.H., Edon-Jock, C., Bonoto, S. et al. Spread of Sugarcane yellow leaf virus in initially disease-free sugarcane is linked to rainfall and host resistance in the humid tropical environment of Guadeloupe. Eur J Plant Pathol 129, 71–80 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-010-9693-y
Gracia-Romero, A., Kefauver, S., Vergara-Díaz, O., Hamadziripi, E., Zaman-Allah, M., & Thierfelder, C. et al. (2020). Leaf versus whole-canopy remote sensing methodologies for crop monitoring under conservation agriculture: a case of study with maize in Zimbabwe. Scientific Reports, 10(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-73110-3
Cruz-Sanabria, H., Sanchez, M., Rivera-Caicedo, J., & Avila-George, H. (2020). Identification of phenological stages of sugarcane cultivation using Sentinel-2 images. 2020 9Th International Conference On Software Process Improvement (CIMPS). https://doi.org/10.1109/cimps52057.2020.9390095
Campbell, G., & Norman, J. (1998). An Introduction to Environmental Biophysics (pp. 247-278). Springer New York.
Rahman, M., & Robson, A. (2020). Integrating Landsat-8 and Sentinel-2 Time Series Data for Yield Prediction of Sugarcane Crops at the Block Level. Remote Sensing, 12(8), 1313. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs12081313
Der, B. (2018). Remote Sensing Indices. Medium. Retrieved 12 October 2021, from https://medium.com/regen-network/remote-sensing-indices-389153e3d947.
Rahman, M., & J. Robson, A. (2016). A Novel Approach for Sugarcane Yield Prediction Using Landsat Time Series Imagery: A Case Study on Bundaberg Region. Advances In Remote Sensing, 05(02), 93-102. https://doi.org/10.4236/ars.2016.52008
McCollam, G. (2018). Correlating Nitrogen Application Rates in Sugarcane With Low-Cost Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) - SARE Grant Management System. Projects.sare.org. Retrieved 12 October 2021, from https://projects.sare.org/sare_project/fs14-282/.
Reed, B., Brown, J., VanderZee, D., Loveland, T., Merchant, J., & Ohlen, D. (1994). Measuring phenological variability from satellite imagery. Journal Of Vegetation Science, 5(5), 703-714. https://doi.org/10.2307/3235884
Nieto, L., Schwalbert, R., Prasad, P., Olson, B., & Ciampitti, I. (2021). An integrated approach of field, weather, and satellite data for monitoring maize phenology. Scientific Reports, 11(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-95253-7
​​Ashwath, N., & Kabir, Z. (2019). Environmental, Economic, and Social Impacts of Biofuel Production from Sugarcane in Australia. Sugarcane Biofuels, 267-284. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-18597-8_12
Sugar. Australian Government | Department of Agriculture, Water and Environment. (2020). Retrieved 1 October 2021, from https://www.agriculture.gov.au/ag-farm-food/crops/sugar.
Kuhnel, I. Relationships of Australian sugarcane yields to various climatic variables. Theor Appl Climatol 54, 217–228 (1996). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00865164
Paturau, J. Alternative Uses of Sugarcane and its Byproducts in Agroindustries, FAO Animal Production and Health Paper. vol. 72. (1986) Retrieved 1 October 2021 from https://www.fao.org/3/s8850e/s8850E03.htm
BOM. Record-breaking La Niña Events. (2012). Bureau of Meteorology. Retrieved 1 October 2021, from http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/enso/history/La-Nina-2010-12.pdf
Xue, J., & Su, B. (2017). Significant Remote Sensing Vegetation Indices: A Review of Developments and Applications. Journal Of Sensors, 2017, 1-17. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/1353691
Campbell, G., n.d. Leaf Area Index (LAI): The Researcher's Complete Guide. [online] METER. Available at: <https://www.metergroup.com/environment/articles/lp80-pain-free-leaf-area-index-lai/> [Accessed 1 October 2021].
Susantoro, T., Wikantika, K., Saepuloh, A. and Harsolumakso, A., 2018. Selection of vegetation indices for mapping the sugarcane condition around the oil and gas field of North West Java Basin, Indonesia. IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 149, p.012001.



Appendix
BOM. Record-breaking La Niña Events. (2012). Bureau of Meteorology. Retrieved 1 October 2021, from http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/enso/history/La-Nina-2010-12.pdf
 Campbell, G., n.d. Leaf Area Index (LAI): The Researcher's Complete Guide. [online] METER. Available at: <https://www.metergroup.com/environment/articles/lp80-pain-free-leaf-area-index-lai/> [Accessed 1 October 2021].
McCollam, G. (2018). Correlating Nitrogen Application Rates in Sugarcane With Low-Cost Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) - SARE Grant Management System. Projects.sare.org. Retrieved 12 October 2021, from https://projects.sare.org/sare_project/fs14-282/.
McCollam, G. (2018). Correlating Nitrogen Application Rates in Sugarcane With Low-Cost Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) - SARE Grant Management System. Projects.sare.org. Retrieved 12 October 2021, from https://projects.sare.org/sare_project/fs14-282/.
McCollam, G. (2018). Correlating Nitrogen Application Rates in Sugarcane With Low-Cost Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) - SARE Grant Management System. Projects.sare.org. Retrieved 12 October 2021, from https://projects.sare.org/sare_project/fs14-282/.
Rahman, M., & Robson, A. (2020). Integrating Landsat-8 and Sentinel-2 Time Series Data for Yield Prediction of Sugarcane Crops at the Block Level. Remote Sensing, 12(8), 1313. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs12081313
